Project Aghermann
-----------------

This is project Aghermann, a program by Andrei Zavada
(johnhommer@gmail.com) designed to run Process S simulations on
Slow-Wave Activity profiles from (human) EEG recordings as outlined in
Achermann et al (1993).  In this capacity, Aghermann produces a set of
sleep homeostat parameters which can be used to describe and
differentiate individual sleepers, such as short vs long sleepers,
early vs late, etc.

Also provided are general-purpose facilities for displaying EEG and
accompanying recordings, such as EOG and EMG, saved in EDF (European
Data Format) files.  These recordings can then be conveniently scored;
scores can be imported/exported in plain ASCII.  No scoring asistance
is provided (although it is planned in some limited form): sleep stage
identification is thus the sole responsibility of the researcher.

Aghermann keeps the recordings in an organized fashion in a tree,
following an experimental design commonly used in sleep research,
i.e., groups of subjects sleeping several (timed) episoded per
session, with recordings from a number of channels.

EEG signals can be manually, per-second filtered for artifacts.  The
PSD analysis is then performed on clean epochs, greatly enhancing the
resulting spectral power profile.  Power course profiles can be
obtained for an arbitrary frequency range.

For description of the underlying model, refer to:

@Article{Achermannetal1993,
  Author         = {Achermann, P. and Dijk, D.-J. and Brunner, D.P. and
                   Borb\'ely, A.A.},
  Title          = {A model of human sleep homeostasis based on {EEG}
                   slow-wave activity: {Q}uantitative comparison of data
                   and simulations},
  Journal        = {Brain Res. Bull.},
  Volume         = {31},
  Pages          = {97-113},
  year           = 1993
}

and to my PhD dissertation: http://dissertations.ub.rug.nl/faculties/science/2007/a.zavada

NOTES ON SECURITY AND ACCESSIBILITY

   There is no consideration specially given to potential security
   issues Aghermann might run into when used to open a corrupt or
   laced EDF file.  If, for example, the header says there are more
   (or less) data records than there actually are in the file,
   Aghermann may still behave in a way one would consider correct or
   natural, but it may just segfault as likely as not.  Your principal
   rule here is, trust your sources.

   Secondly, I have heeded no advice whatsoever on human interface
   guidelines as, for example, adopted by Gnome; the controls are
   designed in a way I considered the most efficient towards a better
   workflow.  And I see no purpose in an obligatory, but empty, menu
   bar that occupies space otherwise so precious when you have five
   waveforms cramped into your netbook screen.

   Likewise, if you have no mouse, there's no practical possibility to
   interact with the program.


USAGE NOTES

1. Setting up the experimental design

   Assuming you have all your edf files available and have your
   experimental design laid out, first spend a minute collecting your
   edf sources in an experiment tree following this pattern:

     ExperimentRoot/Group/Subject/Session/Episode.edf

   Secondly, make sure the recording times stored in the edf files are
   actual and correct as Aghermann will not take guesses if this
   information is missing or incorrect.

   Once your directory tree is set up, start Aghermann, select
   Experiment->Change and point it to the newly created experiment
   tree root directory.

2. Additoinal notes on Signal Type and Label fields in EDF headers

   o  Also make sure the `Label' field is (without quotes) either of the form:

       "<SignalType> <Channel>",

      or just

       "<Channel>",

      where <SignalType> is one of "EEG", "ECG", "EOG", "ERG", "EMG",
      "NC", "MEG", "MCG", "EP", "Temp", "Resp", "SaO2", "Light",
      "Sound", "Event", "Freq".  Only signals of EEG type will be
      selected for the PSD analysis (all signals can still be viewed
      though).

      If SignalType is omitted, Aghermann will try to match the
      Channel against the list of System 1020 channels for EEG signal
      types.  Additionally, channels "Left" and "Right" are recognised as
      EOG, and "Chin", as an EMG signal.

   o  At present, EDF+ features (in particular, discontinuous signals and
      sub-fields of the `PatientID' field) are not supported.


3. Displaying signals and scoring

   In the Measurements view, clicking on an episode will start the
   scoring facility.

   In the scoring view, hover the mouse over the "(hint)" label to see
   what actions are available by clicking on the signal, power course
   and hypnogram views; similarly, tooltips for the scoring controls
   will show corresponding keyboard shortcuts.

   Scoring controls will be inaccessible if you switch to a page
   length different from that specified on the Measurements ->
   Setup -> PSD and Scoring tab.

   Click Score at bottom-right to save the scores and artifact
   markings (see below).


4. Filtering out artifacts

   Mark artifacts as neccessary, on a per-second basis, by mouse
   leftclick+drag+release over a length of the displayed page in the
   upper half of the signal; unmark by rightclick+drag+release.  These
   artifact-marked portions of the signal will have the signal
   dampened by a factor of .85 with edges smoothly merging with the
   adjacent signal.


5. EEG score import/export

   The import filter will read the tokens and attempt to identify the
   score as follows (in a case-insensitive manner):

   W, Wake, 0:			Wake
   N1, N2..4; NREM1..4; 1..4:	NREM Stage 1..4
   R, REM, 5:			REM
   M, MVT, 6:			MVT (Movement Time)
   -, unscored, 9:		Unscored

   All other, unrecognised tokens are skipped and the next token is
   read, but the page currently being identified is not assigned any
   score.  That is, for example, if your file has something other than
   "-", "unscored" or "0" for the Unscored identifier, it will not get
   assigned a score at all, with the next score being applied instead.
   Do some sed work to change the score codes accordingly.


6. Preparing the profiles for simulations

   Once you are done with the preparation of your spectral power
   profiles, proceed to the most interesting part, the Process S
   simulations.

   Edit as necessary the simulation controlling parameters and the
   tunables.  With tunables, those for which the step is set to 0,
   will not be tuned.

   If you have a single sleeping episode per subject/session, the DB2
   amendment does not make sense as it requires some substantial wake
   intervals between sleeping episodes: turn it off in such a case,
   and also set the step value for the rise rate set to 0.  (Strictly
   speaking, for DB2 amendments to be effective, the profile needs to
   be (a) >24h long, and (b) have the timepoint at t=24h in Wake.)

   Likewise, AZ amendment is ineffective for single-episode profiles.


7. Running the simulations

   Then, double-click on a row in the Overview tab.  If all
   constituent episodes have been sufficiently scored, the model run
   facility will be displayed, showing the profile without the
   simulated SWA nor S at the outset.

   The unscored pages and those scored as MVT will be patched up per
   settings on the Controlling Parameters tab (i.e., they can be
   assigned a Wake score or the score of the previous page).

   Either click Stride or Run, to do a single stride (400 cycles by
   default), or as many as it will take for all the required
   parameters to stabilise.

   Upon completion, the simulation is saved along with all the
   intermediate steps (but not the log).


8. Reviewing the obtained courses of Process S and SWA

   After a series of strides have completed, you can step back/forward
   through the stride history, to review the optimisation path the
   routine has followed.  At any such checkpoint, you can modify the
   parameter values and resume the model run (to see how nicely and
   unavoidably it converges, for example).

   One especially useful and nifty feature is the live updating of the
   course of Process S in response to your modifying the parameter
   values.

   Click on an episode to display that episode alone.  Take a snapshot
   and save (as a png image) the current view by doing Alt+leftclick.


8. Running simulations in a batch

   Simulations can be run in a batch (drop down the options from the
   Run button on the Simualtions view of the main window).


9. Exporting simulation results

   Finally, export the simulation results into a tab-separated values sheet.


Should you find Aghermann useful (in its scoring capacity only, or
even to the full array of its modelling sophistication), write me a
note.  Wishlist features can be considered as a matter of course.

Good luck!
